this video is a set of reflections in
response to philip defranco and it's
being done with complete respect and
appreciation for philip defranco because
let me tell you something i try to read
news and political analysis on asia from
every reputable and respectable source
The Economist foreign policy magazine
London School of Economics the most
elite academic institutions and the most
elite and distinguished news and
journalism institutions and Philip
DeFranco right now you do a better job
than any of them and all of them when
you deign to like one day a month take a
break from covering Internet drama and
YouTube gossip to talk about politics of
Asia so Phil DeFranco does in general do
a very good job however um I could do
better if I had the time to dedicate it
to it and we hope we're just now packing
up and relocated in Taiwan I hope I will
have the time dedicate to it in this
video I'm in many ways bringing together
observations from like 25 years of
research it's not what I want to do
though what I really want to do is
challenge myself by doing original
research new research learning things I
didn't already know let me design philip
defranco early on in his new video about
china's hegemony over the oceans their
control of oceanic trade and various
disputed islands and territories he
mentions pretty briefly that that part
of the world is maybe responsible for
like 21 percent of the world's trade he
throws us some economic statistics
really quickly that makes it seem like
these obscure islands located in this
strange tongue shaped formation
extending out southeast from China there
are this extraordinary economic value
why in 2019
why the answer goes all the way back to
the dark ages all right a scholar named
only pillion wrote a famous famous
monograph that started the question
about how international trade shapes the
course of civilizations cultural
development politics all
the other meaningful things we care
about and he started it in a book that
ended up being titled in English
Mohammed and Charlemagne that book came
out at a really interesting time and put
a really realistic role in this and yes
believe me this is not a digression this
has everything to do with Europe's
current relationship to China I kid you
not I'm getting back there right he's
started questioning for the first time
why was there such a decline in the
material quality of civilization from
the Roman Empire period to what we call
the dark ages
the Middle Ages etc now there's a weird
kind of parallel here again and Philip
defranco's video there's this discourse
about China's century of decline the
idea that the Ching dynasty maybe even
longer starting before the Ching dynasty
that china became decadent degenerate
self-indulgent weaker and weaker etc and
then had to take back its rightful place
in the world well actually Europe has a
very similar discourse
it's just several centuries earlier
right that there was this period of
greatness that hit its pinnacle maybe
under Julius Caesar in the Roman Empire
maybe somebody picks another Emperor
Justinian your favorite emperor from the
Roman Empire and then for some reason
everything gets worse so Melissa and I
Melissa's my girlfriend sitting off
camera we were in a museum in the middle
of nowhere in Germany Heidelberg right
goofy
not even Heidelberg the spire so the
countryside outside of Heidelberg
Germany and they had been part of the
Roman Empire and they had trade goods
from North Africa they had perishable
trade goods they had stuff like wine in
an earthenware jug being traded from
North Africa all the way to basically
Heidelberg Germany okay so the extent of
international trade and the Roman Empire
now seems spectacular and it didn't just
go in that direction it went all the way
from Rome to Thailand I kid you not
I've seen it with my own eyes in the
National Museum in Bangkok you can see a
Roman lamp you saw some now in Germany
- so that went all the way from Rome up
to Germany well they also went all the
way east to Bangkok now they could not
send perishable goods to Bangkok they
could not baked fresh brownies and then
so Bangkok they couldn't export cheese
or something like that that would go bad
for those huge but yes something like a
metal lamp those kinds of trade goods
really did go all around the world and
as is well known specifically the coin
that has the name of Julius Caesar on it
I believe is the single most attested
artifact in the history of the world
they're found everywhere it's
troublesome to people they're even found
here in North America every so often
what turns up in Canada the United
States so coinage durable metal objects
spread everywhere in this scholarly work
only pure n for the first time really
started to question why did this decline
happen and he challenged the tendency we
all have and that again the Chinese also
have to just look at this in terms of
decadence as some kind of moral and
aesthetic decay so remember like in
terms of art history you're shown a
picture of this statue from Athens and
you go wow that's an unbelievably
realistic well proportioned muscular
statue from ancient Athens and then you
see this statue from ancient Rome and
then you go look at the Dark Ages and it
seems like all of a sudden nobody knows
how to draw an accurate picture of a
human being right like Jesus looks like
a miniature adult not like a baby
and nobody's muscular anymore and like
nobody's proportioned they don't have
you know the people in the background
they don't have realistic perspective
right so it's very easy to prevent
present to to students present in the
classroom just this narrative of decline
well what what does decline mean what
does it mean
so what only people I was pointing out
is that the decline is in large part due
to these networks that produce value so
ultimately economic but includes things
like education like when you have a
trade in complex wares like glass and
metal and wine and all kinds of other
things over a huge area you have books
manuscripts and in this time
mostly handmade manuscripts there's some
primitive printing around but you know
being written and copied and passed
around you have a network of Education a
network of economic interactions that
under the Roman Empire spread way way
way beyond the Roman Empire and that
really what we perceive as a cultural
decline and a cultural collapse is in
fact an economic collapse now the actual
book I have read I have read on we
appearance Mohammed and Shah main and
most people who quote the book and give
lectures about it have not it is a very
poorly organized very scattered book and
he died before it was published so as
one of those cases were other people had
to take the pieces and put them together
as I recall but it became a symbol for
this new movement towards economic
history put it that way so there has
never been a land barrier between Europe
and China right this general analysis of
world history why are all these boats
even today why are they going through
these obscure islands in the middle of
nowhere of Southeast Asia why didn't we
have continuous trade and development
building up roads and railways linking
Paris to Beijing the same way that we
have between Paris and Berlin why don't
we have the kind of Overland trade that
Europe completely takes for granted
extending between Europe and China why
has that never happened again I'm not
saying what happened overnight I'm
seeing over the last 1,000 years
there is no reason there was no strike
there was no self-evident obvious reason
I'm about to tell you the reason why
trade had to go between Europe and Asia
by going west out of the Mediterranean
then they would stop at Portugal and
this is why Portugal became a great
empire Portugal had no other advantages
Portugal the population was puny at that
time they didn't have some kind of
amazing technology you have to go from
all the way around Africa all the way
around India right and then to East Asia
so this is before the canal was built in
what's now Egypt Suez Canal etc etc
right is unbelievably circuitous and
indirect route it was so indirect it was
so difficult to trade silk between China
and Europe that a guy you may have heard
of named Christopher Columbus managed to
make a proposal to the king of Spain
that he was gonna find a new more direct
trade route by going straight west from
Spain it didn't work out and by the way
when he did that it was based on the
maps by Strabo
Strabo of Alexandria ancient Greek Maps
during the Dark Ages in Europe there was
so little progress in learning and
academia and research they were still
using geography that ultimately is from
like Herodotus in ancient Athens
unbelievable but an updated just a
little bit after Herodotus but the level
of ignorance is truly unbelievable we
have we still have the maps in Strabo
that were used to make this proposal to
the king of Spain okay well here's the
thing
even the title Mohammed Charlemagne what
it's getting at is a very pleasant very
economically objective sounding
re-evaluation of what we can frankly
call Islamophobia right what does it
boil down to
why did quality of life in Western
Europe but not even dodges Western
Europe Western Europe and the whole
Mediterranean the Mediterranean Europe
there's really two areas right the
northwest and the measure
why do quality of life decline so
dramatically and in one ant one word the
answer is Islam Islam changed everything
the discovery that only pure and made is
hey everyone's ignoring how important
Islam is to the history of Europe and in
a sense it's obvious they conquered
Spain but implicitly those people in
Germany who would have been part of the
Roman Empire before they couldn't get
wine or oil or other goods from North
Africa anymore the trade in glass and
soap from Aleppo in Syria the
anomic geography of europe was
profoundly changed by the Islamic
empires plural right and of course there
were more salacious elements if we talk
about the slave trade Oh suddenly
everybody's interested everyone's
interested in slavery the mystery of
wine and oil glass and these other
things but this is this dramatic deep
impact on the social geography of Europe
and here is the necessary sequel that
still to this day nobody wants to deal
with everyone knows this but it's easy
to forget this Islam is not one religion
the most profound effect on the social
and economic geography of both China and
Europe is the split between Sunni and
Shiite that still exists to this day
this is a real historical fact it was
the split between Sunni and Shiite not
the fall of the Roman Empire not the
fall of any particular dynasty in China
not the building of the Great Wall one
thing ended over land trade between
China and Europe and that was the
basically constant state of war constant
state of hostility between Sunni Islam
and Shiite Islam that is what severed
forever
the most fundamental economic fact that
had been taken for granted under
Alexander the Great the Roman Empire and
that indirectly had fuelled Central Asia
North India Europe and extended its
tendrils all the way into China for
durable goods things like silk and metal
things that could really go a long long
way even tea buffle a different story
history of the tea trade well that's
right sir there was there was the Silk
Road and then parallel to it was what
was called the the tea horse road it
sounds better in Chinese but yeah tea
was one of these trade goods they could
go away etc etc right oh the end of the
Silk Road it still continues to this day
do you want to build a high-speed rail
network that connects China to Europe
you got to go through Iran and Iraq
right and the
generalized state of low-level chaos and
hostility today we do have the Suez
Canal boats don't have to go all the way
around Africa but it's an unbelievably
indirect and circuitous route to still
go all the way around India whoa by the
way guess where you get to stop on our
new super efficient trade route to China
where do you get two more your boat
Yemen peaceful ready for business open
for world trade Yemen the happy harbor
of Aden in the country of Yemen where
there's a sir this is 2019 there's a
major civil war still ongoing in Yemen
Yemen does still matter for world trade
for that reason so you got to go past
Yemen you got to go around India and you
got to go through these waters that
guess what China wants politically to
control but that's why those waters are
so important now you may say when I've
talked about this with professors and
with PhDs and stuff I've never once had
anyone even ask this question it's an
intelligent question when I discusses
the people they normally sit there
absolutely shocked and say I can't
believe any of the textbooks I was
taught I can't believe any of the
seminar discussions I had at Cambridge
or Oxford or London School of Economics
or wherever was so as or wherever was
they studied I can't believe we never
dealt with this even when they did hold
unquote economic history it's so and
like normally I'm talking to people and
they know enough that like you know this
is just a missing puzzle piece they know
all this other stuff and economics
terrine they're like oh my god you're
right that's this huge piece of the
puzzle right it would be intelligent to
say back well yeah you know the Silk
Road was super important until you know
this constant state of war until Islam
transformed the social geography of the
world and specifically the city Shiites
but but you know you look at the map
it's not the only Road couldn't people
have compensated by building trains
through Mongolia couldn't they have
compensated by building streams through
Russia or on the southernmost cusps the
Train they are building right now a
train that will finally connect India to
China through the eastern most little
span of India going through me
more than going through good old dongjun
and China through you Nana to China that
is finally being built now in 2019
yes historically fantasies have existed
of either replacing the Silk Road or at
an earlier time competing with the Silk
Road by building major trade routes
either further north or further south
through the enormous landmass of of
Eurasia there is space it was not
impossible but the more you know the
more you realize why it was just barely
possible okay like have you tried
walking through the mountains of
northern Myanmar into you nan have you
tried walking have you tried using a
mule have you tried building a train
really tough and okay sorry until the
day before yesterday well there's still
a civil war in those Mallen so it's
gonna see there's Pacific actually
distill our armed insurgent groups
they're fighting several Wars plenty of
them including anyway including right
where we work you know just just across
from just across the border from from
the home anyway so you know he'll
they're actually still today in 2019
there are armed groups went war is there
but a hundred years ago even more so
these were really really kata carries so
I mean that that's just the southern
route through you nan we talked about
the northern route you gonna have to
look into stuff like the Keaton Empire
if you go through century by century
when was there an opportunity to build
and sustain some kind of route like that
yeah historically there's a parallel
universe where that was not completely
impossible but there are reasons why it
it really didn't work out and then
ultimately the fantasy of really making
it work the French Empire wanted to
build that train they wanted to build a
train going from Vietnam to India the
Russian Empire wanted to build a train
they did build a train a very very thin
rickety strip of track connecting their
empire on the Pacific to to western
Russia and ultimately to to Eastern
Europe um there were attempts but so far
I mean those have been the kind of
rickety feeble attempts to compensate
for a thousand years in which that world
trade system has been broken
and cut off so that is the background to
the bizarre and fascinating history that
Philip DeFranco has just reminded us of
that we're still in a situation where
these islands that seems so meaningless
in and of themselves remain pawns in a
chess game that spans the whole wide
world and that seems to you know
determine who's gonna control world
trade to an unbelievable stat and yeah
guess what there are many roads to peace
but sometimes the road to peace is
literally building a new road